+++
title="XBPS 0.41 is out"
date=2014-09-29
+++

A new XBPS stable version has been released: 0.41. This is a bugfix release
that contains a new feature `reverts`.

Release notes:

- libxbps: another bugfix while checking required shlibs in
reverse dependencies. Written another test case to verify its
correctness.

- libxbps: rather than checking if user has write permission on
package files for removal, check if the files are owned by the
same user ID. This fixes a new issue where files with only the read
bit set cannot be removed. Added a new test case to verify its
 correctness.

- xbps-create(8): xz compressed packages now use default compression
level (-6) rather than max level (-9); max compression level uses
too much memory and it's much slower; by Christian Neukirchen.

- Improvements for xbps bash completions, by Eivind Uggedal.

- A performance improvement for `xbps_file_hash()`, by Enno Boland.

- Added reverts field to package definitions. If defined, a package will
replace all versions specified in this field even if the installed version is
newer. This is helpful when a broken package is released. The maintainer can
downgrade this package and define a reverts field to the broken version. On
the next update xbps-install will automatically replace the broken release by
the new downgraded release.

- Replace xbps-packages directory by void-packages in `xbps-checkvers(8)`,
`xbps-uchroot(8)` and others, by Enno Boland.

Please report issues at
[https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues).
