---
layout: post
title: "XBPS 0.33 is out"
comments: true
---

A new XBPS stable version has been released: 0.33. This is a major
release that also implements a new configuration file format that does
not need `confuse` (among other things).

Release notes:

- xbps-dgraph: fixed a segfault if rootdir wasn't set
(fixes [issue #33](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/33))

- xbps-uhelper now supports downloading files with a defined destination.
The syntax of fetch is `"URI>FILENAME"`. So if you run the following command,
the output file will be named `"bar.tar.gz"` (contributed by Enno Boland (Gottox):

```
$ xbps-uhelper fetch "http://foobar.com/foo.tar.gz>bar.tar.gz"
```

- Rather than performing a pkgdb write per package being unpacked, configured,
or removed, issue the write only once after the transaction phase has finished.

- While checking file permissions for package files removal, make sure
to not dereference symbolic links, because a symlink might point to
a file in the rootfs, which won't have the same uid/gid.

- Fixed [issue #31](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/31)

- New configuration file format with a custom C parser, simpler
and does not need any additional external dependency. confuse is
not necessary anymore.

- Only allow a single writer to the pkgdb to avoid concurrency issues
when performing multiple write transactions (install, update or remove).
Processes that cannot acquire the lock will get an EAGAIN error.

- Do not continue the transaction if downloading a binpkg/signature file
has failed for some reason, stop and return error immediately.

After upgrading the new configuration file will be available at `/etc/xbps/xbps.conf.new-0.33_1`.
The user should copy this file to `/etc/xbps/xbps.conf` and update it accordingly.

For `xbps-src` users, do not forget to run these commands to rebuild your masterdir(s):

    $ xbps-src zap; xbps-src binary-bootstrap

Please report issues at
[https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues)
