---
layout: post
title: "XBPS 0.42 is out"
comments: true
---

A new XBPS stable version has been released: 0.42. This is a major release
that contains some new features and multiple bugfixes.

Release notes:

- xbps-reconfigure(8): new option -i, --ignore to ignore packages
while performing configuration of all packages with -a, --all.
Fixes [#67](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/67).

- xbps-{install,query}: fix alignment in the column output mode
when pkgname is shorter than 4 chars. Fixes [#71](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/71).

- xbps.d(5): new manual page detailing the configuration settings.

- xbps-dgraph(8): added support to generate dependency graphs, repository
mode, prints results to stdout, supports most of the options available
in other utils, etc. This is now a first class utility.

- xbps-{install,query}: added new option (-M, --memory-sync) to fetch and
store remote repository data in memory. That means that synchronizing
the repository archives with `xbps-install -S` is now completely optional.
This also means that `xbps-query(8)` may be used by any user without the
need to be the `superuser` to synchronize the repository archives.

- xbps-{install,query}: added new option (-i, --ignore-conf-repos) to ignore
repositories defined in configuration files (xbps.d). Only repos specified
by the command line will be used (--repository).

- Implemented issue [#69](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/69) (No way to set globally a custom architecture)
A new configuration keyword "architecture" has been added to override
the native machine architecture (uname -m).

- Fixed issue [#68](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/68)
`"xbps_binpkg_arch() asserts if arch contains a dash"`.

- xbps-query(8): added `--cat=FILE` mode to print FILE stored in a binary package
to stdout. This works exactly as the `--files` mode: if the matching binary package
is not available in the cachedir, xbps will establish a network connection
to the target repository to get the contents of FILE on the fly.

- Get rid of repodata index-files, that contained all pkg files of a repository
in the archive. That file was so huge that incresed the repository archive
size by 8x. That means that `xbps-query -Ro` will now make N parallel connections
to the remote server to inspect the binary packages remotely; if the binary
package is in cachedir, no network connection to the remote server will be
established. This reduces the size of the main x86\_64 repository (4000 packages)
to 700KB, compared to 4.5MB previously.

- xbps-create(8): fixed issue [#64](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/64)
 "xbps-create(8) incorrect installed-size with hardlinks".

- Added a new configuration keyword `bestmatching`, which expects `true` or `false`
and disabled by default. If enabled the pkg with the greatest version available
in all registered repositories will be choosen, rather than the first package
matching the expression. This keyword can be set in a configuration file.

- xbps-rindex(8): added `-d/--debug` option.

- utils: the `-C/--config` option now expects a path to a directory storing
configuration files; if first character is not `'/'` it will be treated as
 relative to rootdir.

- `<sysconfdir>/xbps/xbps.conf` is not longer installed, in fact there are no files
installed anymore to sysconfdir. The xbps.conf file with everything commented out
is now installed to `<sharedir>/xbps.d/xbps.conf` just as example.

- Replaced config/system {preserve,repo,virtualpkg}.d directories with a single
xbps.d directory that may contain configuration files of all kinds:
general options, repositories, virtual packages, and preserved files.
By default set to `<sysconfdir>/xbps.d` and `<sharedir>/xbps.d`:

    - /usr/local/etc/xbps.d         <- configuration directory
    - /usr/local/share/xbps.d       <- system configuration directory

      Files bearing the same filename in the configuration directory override
those available in the system configuration directory.

- Virtual packages are now collected directly from pkgdb, that means
that installed packages do not need to have a virtualpkg configuration
file in the system virtualpkg.d directory.

- xbps-{install,remove}: implemented a column/wide output mode
as requested in [#63](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/63).
If the terminal has enough columns it will use this and falling back
to the previous mode otherwise.

- libxbps: replaces the internal redundant dependency sorting step
that was made in `xbps_transaction_prepare()` with a simple implementation
that fixes 2 bugs and makes xbps 2x faster to resolve dependencies.

      Packages that don't have `provides` obj but were declared as virtual packages,
were not detected correctly and lead me to rewrite this code.

- Fixed issue [#62](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/62) (Dup replaced pkgs in transaction).

- If removing a package and euid==0 do not check for file owner, being root
means that all files can be removed properly. This fixes package removal
when some files were not owned by root, rather by a system account.

- Fixed 65 issues found by Coverity scan. Defect density is now below 0.30
per 1000 lines of code.

- Use atomic builtins if supported by the compiler in our portableproplib copy
to handle object reference counting. This should be cheaper than using a mutex.

- The manpages are now fully compliant with mdoc; thanks to mandoc -Wall.

- Added support to run the testsuite in place, without the need to perform
installation; use `make check` to run it.

Please report issues at
[https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues).
