---
layout: post
title: "XBPS 0.48 is out"
comments: true
---

A new XBPS stable version has been released: 0.48. This is a major release
that contains new features and multiple bugfixes:

* `xbps-alternatives(1)`: new utility to list or set alternatives provided by
packages. This effectively implements a functional alternatives framework
to switch easily a default provider via symbolic links.

* `xbps-{install,reconfigure,remove}(1)`: do not log to console when the
syslog option (`xbps.d(5)`) is enabled. Messages are send to stderr/stdout,
so that logging to the console duplicates them.
Close [#123](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/123)

* `xbps-fbulk(1)`: now comes with a manual page for the section 1.

* libxbps: implemented reverse conflicts. That means that just a single pkg
 needs to set conflicts to be effective, rather than all involved pkgs.

* libxbps: with \-M (\--memory-sync opt of xbps-{install,query}) only process
 remote repositories, not local ones.

* libfetch: merged some features from FreeBSD:

        - Supports HTTP/1.1 308 redirect.
        - SSLv2 HTTPS connections are forbidden by default.
        - SSL/TLS HTTPS client certificate validation.
        - Fixes for user/password encoding, misc.

    Client certificate validation uses the default CA path (/etc/ssl/certs)
and some environment variables override its behaviour:

        - SSL_CA_CERT_FILE: path to the CA file.
        - SSL_CA_CERT_PATH: path to the CA path (defaults to /etc/ssl/certs)
        - SSL_NO_VERIFY_PEER: disable certificate verification.
        - SSL_NO_VERIFY_HOSTNAME: disable certificate hostname verification.

* lixbps: use a sane umask if the pkgdb file needs to created for the first
time. Thanks to Wolfgang Draxinger [#108](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/pull/108).

* `xbps-install(1)`: `-n/--dry-run` mode now also prints `installed_size` and
`filename-size` objects as 5th and 6th argument, respectively.
This implements [#109](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/109).

* libxbps: fixed another issue when replacing an existing pkg with a virtual
pkg, and there's an update for the original pkg in the transaction.
Fixes [#116](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/116).

* libxbps: the rpool functions now set errno to ENOENT when the target
 pkg cannot be found in registered repos.

* libxbps: fix a bug where broken reverse dependencies would be detected
 before detecting packages that need to be replaced in transaction.

* `xbps-query(1)`: fail if unused arguments are supplied.

* libxbps: relative cachedir set via `xbps.d(5)` now work correctly.
Fixes [#117](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/117)

* `xbps-create(1)`: --compression now accepts `none` to not use any
compression format.

* `xbps-create(1)`: it is now able to generate identical packages when its
content does not differ. This is the first part required to the
`100% reproducible builds` goal.

* `xbps-create(1)`: do not add a build-date property to packages.

* `xbps-rindex(1)`: use mtime of file instead of the build-date field in the
package to set build-date in the repo index.

* libxbps: when using verbose mode `(-v)` also print pkgs that are being
added to the transaction, this way we can know what pkg(s) are blocking
a transaction when there are unresolved (reverse)dependencies.

* libxbps: improved messages when reverse dependencies in a transaction
are not satistfied. Close [#113](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/113).

	After
	-----
	$ xbps-install -un
	re2-2015.07.01_1 (update) breaks installed pkg `chromium-44.0.2403.155_1'
	Transaction aborted due to unresolved dependencies.
	$

	Before
	------
	$ xbps-install -un
	chromium-44.0.2403.155_1 broken, needs `re2-2015.07.01_1'
	Transaction aborted due to unresolved dependencies.
	$

* Multiple minor issues found by Coverity scan were fixed.

* `xbps-checkvers(1)`: fixed an endless loop while processing templates containing
extra alphanumeric characters in the `reverts` object. Added a new testcase
to verify its correctness.

Please report issues at
[https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues).
