---
layout: post
title: "XBPS 0.46 is out"
comments: true
---

A new XBPS stable version has been released: 0.46. This is a minor release
that contains multiple bugfixes.

* `xbps-*`: all utilities are now using `getopt_long()` rather than `getopt()`
to avoid the differences with glibc and musl when processing arguments.
Thanks to Chris M. Branon for #103.

* `xbps_transaction_prepare()`: do not release the transaction dictionary
if it returns ENOSPC, we need it to have access to this data to print
required/free space. Fixes [#101](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/101)

* `xbps-uchroot(1)`: now handles `SIG{INT,TERM,QUIT}` signals to clean up the
temporary masterdir if `-t` is set.

* `/usr/sbin` is now a symlink in void, don't consider it as obsolete and never
remove it even if it was detected as obsolete.

* `xbps-rindex(1)`: use `-s, --sign` to initialize the repository archive
with the required metadata to allow signed packages. Added `-S, --sign-pkg`
to sign a specific package archive. This allows to sign a specific package,
rather than all packages available in that repository.

* If the repository write lock is already taken, sleep for 1 second, rather
than looping endlessly without any timing; this consumed too much CPU time
gratuitously.

* If verifying a pkg signature fails for some reason, i.e: pkg archive is incomplete,
signature file is incomplete, whatever, just remove both files. Let's assume
next time the files are downloaded they will be valid.

Please report issues at
[https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues).
