---
layout: post
title: "XBPS 0.45 is out"
comments: true
---

A new XBPS stable version has been released: 0.45. This is a minor release
that introduces a new utility (`xbps-fbulk`), and multiple bugfixes/enhancements.

- `xbps-install(1)`: added `-U --unpack-only` option, to only unpack packages
in the transaction, skips the configuration phase.

- configure: added `--enable-fulldebug` option to enable extra/expensive
debug output.

- libxbps: fixed a dangling pointer when unpacking configuration files that
are renamed (because they existed), if the unpack callback function is set.

- proplib: extra checks when internalizing plists to avoid NULL pointer
dereferences with broken files.

- Move manual pages of all utilities to the section 1 (user commands).
The xbps utilities can be used by any user so that there's no point
in having them in the section 8 (administraction and privileged commands).

- configure: `--sbindir` -> `--bindir` and executables are installed into
`<prefix>/bin` not `<prefix>/sbin` anymore.

- `xbps-install(1)`: if there's not enough sufficient free space on rootdir,
print the required size by the transaction and free space.

- libxbps: if a pkg signature file cannot be verified, don't continue processing
other files, stop and return error immediately.

- `xbps-remove(1)`: fixed regression while removing recursively packages, don't remove
all package orphans, this task belongs to `-o` not `-R`.

    This closes #95 (`xbps-remove -R` pkg lists/removes orphans):
    [https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/95](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues/95)

- `xbps-uunshare(1)`: replaced `-D`, `-H` and `-S` options with `-b src:dest`. This bind mounts
src into dir/dest and allows unlimited mounts.

- `xbps-uchroot(1)`: replaced `-D`, `-H` and `-S` options with `-b src:dest`. This bind mounts
src into dir/dest and allows unlimited mounts.

- configure: added `--dbdir` options to customize path to pkgdb.

- `xbps-uchroot(1)`: added `-o` option to pass arguments to the tmpfs mount,
as is. See `mount(1)`. Useful to specify a size for the temporary tmpfs
with overlayfs (-O).

- `xbps-uchroot(1)`: added `-t` option to mount a tmpfs as temporary directory
 for overlayfs (-O).

- libxbps: file descriptors are now opened with O\_CLOEXEC, to avoid warnings
of leaked file descriptors while running package install/remove scripts.

- xbps-query(1): do not truncate output if stdout is not a tty.

- libfetch: added support for keep-alive connections even if the HTTP server returns
304 (Not Modified). This is a noticable performance improvement for `xbps-install -S`.

- xbps now autoupdates itself when there's a package update.

- `xbps-uchroot(1`): added `-O` option to use overlayfs to mount CHROOTDIR in
a temporary directory stored on tmpfs. This needs linux `>= 3.18`.

- `xbps-rindex(1)`: fixed concurrency issues with `-a` and `-c` modes; use a simple
file lock to avoid inconsistent results in generated repodata.

Please report issues at
[https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues](https://github.com/voidlinux/xbps/issues).
