---
title: Switching back to OpenSSL
layout: post
---

The Void Linux team is [switching back to
OpenSSL](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/pull/21056) on March 5th,
2021 (2021-03-05).

For most users, there should be no noticeable change. If you have any packages
installed that are no longer provided by Void, or your system has explicit
dependencies on LibreSSL, you will of course need to take action to ensure your
system continues to function after the switch.

If you experience any issues, feel free to reach out to us! You can [open an
issue](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/issues/new) on GitHub or
ping us in the `#voidlinux` channel on <https://freenode.net>.

---

A discussion about switching to OpenSSL began in a Request For Comments (RFC)
posted on April 12th, 2020, at
[void-linux/void-packages#20935](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/issues/20935).
Since then, a majority of Void maintainers have expressed support for the move.
The main reasons for the switch are as listed in the RFC:

- Because most software targets OpenSSL, Void will no longer have to maintain
  (in some cases, very complex) patches to support LibreSSL. The complexity of
  the OpenSSL API makes such patching burdensome and risky, with mistakes
  potentially causing runtime errors or security issues - we have avoided
  those, as far as we know, but this has required a lot of effort.
- Extensive support for platform specific optimizations outside of x86.
- Access to new standards and algorithms earlier, such as full TLS 1.3 support.

As a result of the above, the switch to OpenSSL is expected to lessen the time
and effort spent on packages that require an OpenSSL-like library. This is
especially notable because most other distributions which used LibreSSL have
dropped it, so there aren't as many people amongst whom to distribute the
effort.

- Alpine, which switched to LibreSSL temporarily, switched back to OpenSSL in
  January 2019, with the [3.9.0
  release](https://alpinelinux.org/posts/Alpine-3.9.0-released.html).
- More recently, Gentoo, which used to offer LibreSSL as an option, has
  [discontinued that
  support](https://www.gentoo.org/support/news-items/2021-01-05-libressl-support-discontinued.html)
  as well.

For further context, LWN [covered the subject of LibreSSL on
Linux](https://lwn.net/Articles/841664/) at the beginning of this year. The
article also covers the attention and improvements that the OpenSSL project has
received post-Heartbleed, which was one of the main reasons for Void's initial
switch to LibreSSL.

For an example of extra work caused by packages that expect OpenSSL, Void's
version of Qt5 is heavily patched in order to properly support LibreSSL.
Furthermore, the just released Qt6 would also need significant effort to be
patched and maintained to use LibreSSL, without the possibility of such effort
being upstreamed.

At the same time, other software can have limited functionality or hit edge
cases when using LibreSSL, due to not being thoroughly tested with it. One
example is Python, which is limited in the ciphers available to running
programs, since it depends on what the SSL library provides - they are even
[considering dropping any support for LibreSSL in the
future](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0644/#libressl-support). Another
example is OpenVPN, which we have received bug reports for connection issues
with LibreSSL
([void-linux/void-packages#23413](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/issues/23413)).
This required us to switch the package to use Mbed TLS by default, resulting in
some limitations to the resulting package. With the switch to OpenSSL, the
OpenVPN package will now be provided in the most widely deployed and tested
configuration, so similar compatibility hiccups are unlikely to reappear.

Unfortunately, this move has required us to drop some packages that rely on the
OpenSSL 1.0.1 API; while LibreSSL maintains compatibility with this legacy API,
modern OpenSSL has abandoned it.

One great feature of LibreSSL not offered by OpenSSL is the `libtls` library,
which aims to be a hard to misuse interface for communicating over the web
safely, with sane defaults. Some of the packages we ship depend on it, so work
has been done to package a standalone version of it in
[void-linux/void-packages#28732](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/pull/28732).

The Void Linux team is grateful for the work of the OpenBSD community on
[libressl-portable](https://github.com/libressl-portable/portable), we have
greatly benefited from their work. Void continues to package other excellent
OpenBSD software, including OpenSSH and signify, which is our tool of choice
for signing live images.

In conclusion, we expect our switch to OpenSSL to ease maintenance overhead,
provide the same reliable experience to users, and improve functionality in
select packages. Look forward to the update landing some time after March 5th!
