---
title: Upcoming glibc upgrade requires updates for other packages on 32-bit machines
layout: post
---

**Note:** This only applies to users of Void's glibc version on 32-bit
machines. If the command `xbps-uhelper arch` prints something other than
`i686`, `armv7l` or `armv6l`, like `armv6l-musl`, you don't need to do
anything.

Void Linux currently packages glibc version 2.30, but is going to update to
2.32 soon, together with the long awaited GCC 10. Since this new version makes
use of new system calls, due to the ongoing time64 (support for times after
2038 on 32-bit platforms) work on glibc, applications with restrictive seccomp
filters that haven't been rebuilt for the new glibc version **will stop
working**. Packages with such issues include:

- `openssh`
- `firefox`
- `chromium`
- `qt5-webengine` (and consequently dependants, such as `qutebrowser`)
- `electron*` (and consequently dependants, such as `element-desktop`)

We will be pushing updates to these packages *before* the glibc update, if
possible, but it won't be possible for all of them. This includes `openssh`,
which means you can be **locked out of your system** if that's what you use to
access it and you perform a partial upgrade that only includes the `glibc`
package.

Therefore, even though Void enables partial upgrades, you should perform a full
system upgrade when `glibc` appears in the `xbps-install -Su` list. Be sure to
test these packages - for `openssh` this includes actually opening a session,
since `sshd` itself runs without issue. If for some reason something in your
system stops working, you can of course reinstall the old `glibc` package using
[xdowngrade(1)](https://man.voidlinux.org/xtools.1) from the `xtools` package:

```
# xdowngrade /var/cache/xbps/glibc-2.30_2.x86_64.xbps /var/cache/xbps/glibc-locales-2.30_2.x86_64.xbps
```

If we missed some package with this issue, please let us know! You can [open an
issue](https://github.com/void-linux/void-packages/issues/new) on GitHub or
ping us in the `#voidlinux` channel on <https://freenode.net>.
